The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Christmas Carol
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A Christmas Carol

Author: Charles Dickens

Illustrator: Arthur Rackham

Release date: December 24, 2007 [eBook #24022]

Language: English

Original publication: Philadelphia and New York: J. B. Lippincott Company,, 1915

Credits: Produced by Suzanne Shell, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHRISTMAS CAROL ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











  A CHRISTMAS CAROL

  [Illustration: _"How now?" said Scrooge, caustic and cold as ever.
  "What do you want with me?"_]


  A CHRISTMAS CAROL

  [Illustration]

  BY

  CHARLES DICKENS

  [Illustration]

  ILLUSTRATED BY ARTHUR RACKHAM

  [Illustration]

  J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY PHILADELPHIA AND NEW YORK

  FIRST PUBLISHED 1915

  REPRINTED 1923, 1927, 1932, 1933, 1934, 1935, 1947, 1948, 1952, 1958,
  1962, 1964, 1966, 1967, 1969, 1971, 1972, 1973

  ISBN: 0-397-00033-2

  PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN




  PREFACE

  I have endeavoured in this Ghostly little book to raise the Ghost of an
  Idea which shall not put my readers out of humour with themselves, with
  each other, with the season, or with me. May it haunt their house
  pleasantly, and no one wish to lay it.

  Their faithful Friend and Servant,

  C. D.

  _December, 1843._




  CHARACTERS

  Bob Cratchit, clerk to Ebenezer Scrooge.
  Peter Cratchit, a son of the preceding.
  Tim Cratchit ("Tiny Tim"), a cripple, youngest son of Bob Cratchit.
  Mr. Fezziwig, a kind-hearted, jovial old merchant.
  Fred, Scrooge's nephew.
  Ghost of Christmas Past, a phantom showing things past.
  Ghost of Christmas Present, a spirit of a kind, generous,
    and hearty nature.
  Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come, an apparition showing the shadows
    of things which yet may happen.
  Ghost of Jacob Marley, a spectre of Scrooge's former partner in business.
  Joe, a marine-store dealer and receiver of stolen goods.
  Ebenezer Scrooge, a grasping, covetous old man, the surviving partner
    of the firm of Scrooge and Marley.
  Mr. Topper, a bachelor.
  Dick Wilkins, a fellow apprentice of Scrooge's.

  Belle, a comely matron, an old sweetheart of Scrooge's.
  Caroline, wife of one of Scrooge's debtors.
  Mrs. Cratchit, wife of Bob Cratchit.
  Belinda and Martha Cratchit, daughters of the preceding.

  Mrs. Dilber, a laundress.
  Fan, the sister of Scrooge.
  Mrs. Fezziwig, the worthy partner of Mr. Fezziwig.




  CONTENTS

  STAVE ONE--MARLEY'S GHOST                                             3
  STAVE TWO--THE FIRST OF THE THREE SPIRITS                            37
  STAVE THREE--THE SECOND OF THE THREE SPIRITS                         69
  STAVE FOUR--THE LAST OF THE SPIRITS                                 111
  STAVE FIVE--THE END OF IT                                           137


  LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

  _IN COLOUR_


  "How now?" said Scrooge, caustic
    and cold as ever. "What do you
    want with me?"                                           _Frontispiece_

  Bob Cratchit went down a slide on
    Cornhill, at the end of a lane of
    boys, twenty times, in honour of
    its being Christmas Eve                                           16

  Nobody under the bed; nobody in
    the closet; nobody in his dressing-gown,
    which was hanging up
    in a suspicious attitude against
    the wall                                                          20

  The air was filled with phantoms,
   wandering hither and thither in
    restless haste and moaning as
    they went                                                         32

  Then old Fezziwig stood out to
    dance with Mrs. Fezziwig                                          54

  A flushed and boisterous group                                      62

  Laden with Christmas toys and
    presents                                                          64

  The way he went after that plump
    sister in the lace tucker!                                       100

  "How are you?" said one.
    "How are you?" returned the other.
   "Well!" said the first. "Old
    Scratch has got his own at last,
    hey?"                                                            114

  "What do you call this?" said Joe.
    "Bed-curtains!" "Ah!" returned
    the woman, laughing....
    "Bed-curtains!"

  "You don't mean to say you took
    'em down, rings and all, with him
    lying there?" said Joe.

  "Yes, I do," replied the woman.
    "Why not?"                                                       120

  "It's I, your uncle Scrooge. I have
    come to dinner. Will you let
    me in, Fred?"                                                    144

  "Now, I'll tell you what, my friend,"
    said Scrooge. "I am not going
    to stand this sort of thing any
    longer."                                                         146

[Illustration]

_IN BLACK AND WHITE_


  Tailpiece                                                           vi
  Tailpiece to List of Coloured Illustrations                          x
  Tailpiece to List of Black and White Illustrations                  xi
  Heading to Stave One                                                 3
  They were portly gentlemen, pleasant to behold                      12
  On the wings of the wind                                         28-29
  Tailpiece to Stave One                                              34
  Heading to Stave Two                                                37
  He produced a decanter of curiously
  light wine and a block of curiously heavy cake                      50
  She left him, and they parted                                       60
  Tailpiece to Stave Two                                              65
  Heading to Stave Three                                              69
  There was nothing very cheerful in the climate                      75
  He had been Tim's blood-horse all the way from church            84-85
  With the pudding                                                    88
  Heading to Stave Four                                              111
  Heading to Stave Five                                              137
  Tailpiece to Stave Five                                            147

[Illustration]


STAVE ONE


[Illustration]




MARLEY'S GHOST


Marley was dead, to begin with. There is no doubt whatever about that.
The register of his burial was signed by the clergyman, the clerk, the
undertaker, and the chief mourner. Scrooge signed it. And Scrooge's name
was good upon 'Change for anything he chose to put his hand to. Old
Marley was as dead as a door-nail.

Mind! I don't mean to say that I know of my own knowledge, what there is
particularly dead about a door-nail. I might have been inclined, myself,
to regard a coffin-nail as the deadest piece of ironmongery in the
trade. But the wisdom of our ancestors is in the simile; and my
unhallowed hands shall not disturb it, or the country's done for. You
will, therefore, permit me to repeat, emphatically, that Marley was as
dead as a door-nail.

Scrooge knew he was dead? Of course he did. How could it be otherwise?
Scrooge and he were partners for I don't know how many years. Scrooge
was his sole executor, his sole administrator, his sole assign, his sole
residuary legatee, his sole friend, and sole mourner. And even Scrooge
was not so dreadfully cut up by the sad event but that he was an
excellent man of business on the very day of the funeral, and solemnised
it with an undoubted bargain.

The mention of Marley's funeral brings me back to the point I started
from. There is no doubt that Marley was dead. This must be distinctly
understood, or nothing wonderful can come of the story I am going to
relate. If we were not perfectly convinced that Hamlet's father died
before the play began, there would be nothing more remarkable in his
taking a stroll at night, in an easterly wind, upon his own ramparts,
than there would be in any other middle-aged gentleman rashly turning
out after dark in a breezy spot--say St. Paul's Churchyard, for
instance--literally to astonish his son's weak mind.

Scrooge never painted out Old Marley's name. There it stood, years
afterwards, above the warehouse door: Scrooge and Marley. The firm was
known as Scrooge and Marley. Sometimes people new to the business called
Scrooge Scrooge, and sometimes Marley, but he answered to both names. It
was all the same to him.

Oh! but he was a tight-fisted hand at the grindstone, Scrooge! a
squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous old
sinner! Hard and sharp as flint, from which no steel had ever struck out
generous fire; secret, and self-contained, and solitary as an oyster.
The cold within him froze his old features, nipped his pointed nose,
shrivelled his cheek, stiffened his gait; made his eyes red, his thin
lips blue; and spoke out shrewdly in his grating voice. A frosty rime
was on his head, and on his eyebrows, and his wiry chin. He carried his
own low temperature always about with him; he iced his office in the
dog-days, and didn't thaw it one degree at Christmas.

External heat and cold had little influence on Scrooge. No warmth could
warm, no wintry weather chill him. No wind that blew was bitterer than
he, no falling snow was more intent upon its purpose, no pelting rain
less open to entreaty. Foul weather didn't know where to have him. The
heaviest rain, and snow, and hail, and sleet could boast of the
advantage over him in only one respect. They often 'came down'
handsomely, and Scrooge never did.

Nobody ever stopped him in the street to say, with gladsome looks, 'My
dear Scrooge, how are you? When will you come to see me?' No beggars
implored him to bestow a trifle, no children asked him what it was
o'clock, no man or woman ever once in all his life inquired the way to
such and such a place, of Scrooge. Even the blind men's dogs appeared to
know him; and, when they saw him coming on, would tug their owners into
doorways and up courts; and then would wag their tails as though they
said, 'No eye at all is better than an evil eye, dark master!'

But what did Scrooge care? It was the very thing he liked. To edge his
way along the crowded paths of life, warning all human sympathy to keep
its distance, was what the knowing ones call 'nuts' to Scrooge.

Once upon a time--of all the good days in the year, on Christmas
Eve--old Scrooge sat busy in his counting-house. It was cold, bleak,
biting weather; foggy withal; and he could hear the people in the court
outside go wheezing up and down, beating their hands upon their breasts,
and stamping their feet upon the pavement stones to warm them. The City
clocks had only just gone three, but it was quite dark already--it had
not been light all day--and candles were flaring in the windows of the
neighbouring offices, like ruddy smears upon the palpable brown air. The
fog came pouring in at every chink and keyhole, and was so dense
without, that, although the court was of the narrowest, the houses
opposite were mere phantoms. To see the dingy cloud come drooping down,
obscuring everything, one might have thought that nature lived hard by,
and was brewing on a large scale.

The door of Scrooge's counting-house was open, that he might keep his
eye upon his clerk, who in a dismal little cell beyond, a sort of tank,
was copying letters. Scrooge had a very small fire, but the clerk's fire
was so very much smaller that it looked like one coal. But he couldn't
replenish it, for Scrooge kept the coal-box in his own room; and so
surely as the clerk came in with the shovel, the master predicted that
it would be necessary for them to part. Wherefore the clerk put on his
white comforter, and tried to warm himself at the candle; in which
effort, not being a man of strong imagination, he failed.

'A merry Christmas, uncle! God save you!' cried a cheerful voice. It was
the voice of Scrooge's nephew, who came upon him so quickly that this
was the first intimation he had of his approach.

'Bah!' said Scrooge. 'Humbug!'

He had so heated himself with rapid walking in the fog and frost, this
nephew of Scrooge's, that he was all in a glow; his face was ruddy and
handsome; his eyes sparkled, and his breath smoked again.

'Christmas a humbug, uncle!' said Scrooge's nephew. 'You don't mean
that, I am sure?'

'I do,' said Scrooge. 'Merry Christmas! What right have you to be merry?
What reason have you to be merry? You're poor enough.'

'Come, then,' returned the nephew gaily. 'What right have you to be
dismal? What reason have you to be morose? You're rich enough.'

Scrooge, having no better answer ready on the spur of the moment, said,
'Bah!' again; and followed it up with 'Humbug!'

'Don't be cross, uncle!' said the nephew.

'What else can I be,' returned the uncle, 'when I live in such a world
of fools as this? Merry Christmas! Out upon merry Christmas! What's
Christmas-time to you but a time for paying bills without money; a time
for finding yourself a year older, and not an hour richer; a time for
balancing your books, and having every item in 'em through a round dozen
of months presented dead against you? If I could work my will,' said
Scrooge indignantly, 'every idiot who goes about with "Merry Christmas"
on his lips should be boiled with his own pudding, and buried with a
stake of holly through his heart. He should!'

'Uncle!' pleaded the nephew.

'Nephew!' returned the uncle sternly, 'keep Christmas in your own way,
and let me keep it in mine.'

'Keep it!' repeated Scrooge's nephew. 'But you don't keep it.'

'Let me leave it alone, then,' said Scrooge. 'Much good may it do you!
Much good it has ever done you!'

'There are many things from which I might have derived good, by which I
have not profited, I dare say,' returned the nephew; 'Christmas among
the rest. But I am sure I have always thought of Christmas-time, when
it has come round--apart from the veneration due to its sacred name and
origin, if anything belonging to it can be apart from that--as a good
time; a kind, forgiving, charitable, pleasant time; the only time I know
of, in the long calendar of the year, when men and women seem by one
consent to open their shut-up hearts freely, and to think of people
below them as if they really were fellow-passengers to the grave, and
not another race of creatures bound on other journeys. And therefore,
uncle, though it has never put a scrap of gold or silver in my pocket, I
believe that it _has_ done me good and _will_ do me good; and I say, God
bless it!'

The clerk in the tank involuntarily applauded. Becoming immediately
sensible of the impropriety, he poked the fire, and extinguished the
last frail spark for ever.

'Let me hear another sound from _you_,' said Scrooge, 'and you'll keep
your Christmas by losing your situation! You're quite a powerful
speaker, sir,' he added, turning to his nephew. 'I wonder you don't go
into Parliament.'

'Don't be angry, uncle. Come! Dine with us to-morrow.'

Scrooge said that he would see him----Yes, indeed he did. He went the
whole length of the expression, and said that he would see him in that
extremity first.

'But why?' cried Scrooge's nephew. 'Why?'

'Why did you get married?' said Scrooge.

'Because I fell in love.'

'Because you fell in love!' growled Scrooge, as if that were the only
one thing in the world more ridiculous than a merry Christmas. 'Good
afternoon!'

'Nay, uncle, but you never came to see me before that happened. Why give
it as a reason for not coming now?'

'Good afternoon,' said Scrooge.

'I want nothing from you; I ask nothing of you; why cannot we be
friends?'

'Good afternoon!' said Scrooge.

'I am sorry, with all my heart, to find you so resolute. We have never
had any quarrel to which I have been a party. But I have made the trial
in homage to Christmas, and I'll keep my Christmas humour to the last.
So A Merry Christmas, uncle!'

'Good afternoon,' said Scrooge.

'And A Happy New Year!'

'Good afternoon!' said Scrooge.

His nephew left the room without an angry word, notwithstanding. He
stopped at the outer door to bestow the greetings of the season on the
clerk, who, cold as he was, was warmer than Scrooge; for he returned
them cordially.

'There's another fellow,' muttered Scrooge, who overheard him: 'my
clerk, with fifteen shillings a week, and a wife and family, talking
about a merry Christmas. I'll retire to Bedlam.'

This lunatic, in letting Scrooge's nephew out, had let two other people
in. They were portly gentlemen, pleasant to behold, and now stood, with
their hats off, in Scrooge's office. They had books and papers in their
hands, and bowed to him.

'Scrooge and Marley's, I believe,' said one of the gentlemen, referring
to his list. 'Have I the pleasure of addressing Mr. Scrooge, or Mr.
Marley?'

'Mr. Marley has been dead these seven years,' Scrooge replied. 'He died
seven years ago, this very night.'

'We have no doubt his liberality is well represented by his surviving
partner,' said the gentleman, presenting his credentials.

[Illustration: THEY WERE PORTLY GENTLEMEN, PLEASANT TO BEHOLD]

It certainly was; for they had been two kindred spirits. At the ominous
word 'liberality' Scrooge frowned, and shook his head, and handed the
credentials back.

'At this festive season of the year, Mr. Scrooge,' said the gentleman,
taking up a pen, 'it is more than usually desirable that we should make
some slight provision for the poor and destitute, who suffer greatly at
the present time. Many thousands are in want of common necessaries;
hundreds of thousands are in want of common comforts, sir.'

'Are there no prisons?' asked Scrooge.

'Plenty of prisons,' said the gentleman, laying down the pen again.

'And the Union workhouses?' demanded Scrooge. 'Are they still in
operation?'

'They are. Still,' returned the gentleman, 'I wish I could say they were
not.'

'The Treadmill and the Poor Law are in full vigour, then?' said Scrooge.

'Both very busy, sir.'

'Oh! I was afraid, from what you said at first, that something had
occurred to stop them in their useful course,' said Scrooge. 'I am very
glad to hear it.'

'Under the impression that they scarcely furnish Christian cheer of mind
or body to the multitude,' returned the gentleman, 'a few of us are
endeavouring to raise a fund to buy the Poor some meat and drink, and
means of warmth. We choose this time, because it is a time, of all
others, when Want is keenly felt, and Abundance rejoices. What shall I
put you down for?'

'Nothing!' Scrooge replied.

'You wish to be anonymous?'

'I wish to be left alone,' said Scrooge. 'Since you ask me what I wish,
gentlemen, that is my answer. I don't make merry myself at Christmas,
and I can't afford to make idle people merry. I help to support the
establishments I have mentioned--they cost enough: and those who are
badly off must go there.'



